README.md, before:

# dbt-synapse

custom [dbt](https://www.getdbt.com) adapter for [Azure Synapse](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/synapse-analytics/). Major credit due to @mikaelene and [his `sqlserver` custom adapter](https://github.com/mikaelene/dbt-sqlserver).
Passing all tests in [dbt-integration-tests](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-integration-tests/). 

## major differences b/w `dbt-synapse` and `dbt-sqlserver`
- macros use only Azure Synapse `T-SQL`. [Relevant GitHub issue](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/azure-docs/issues/55713)
- use of [Create Table as Select (CTAS)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/t-sql/statements/create-table-as-select-azure-sql-data-warehouse?view=aps-pdw-2016-au7) means you don't need post-hooks to create indices
- Azure Active Directory Authentication options
- rewrite of snapshots because Synapse doesn't support `MERGE`.
- external table creation via details from yaml.
  - must first create  `EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE` and `EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT`s.

## status & support
as of now, only support for dbt `0.18.0`, support for forthcoming `0.18.0` in development

Passing all tests in [dbt-integration-tests](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-integration-tests/). 

### outstanding work:
- switch to [`dbt-adapter-tests`](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-adapter-tests)
- test incremental materializations more thoroughly than is done with [`dbt-integration-tests`](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-integration-tests/).
- Add support for `ActiveDirectoryMsi`
- auto-create  `EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE` and `EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT`s.
- [officially rename the adapter from `sqlserver` to `synapse`](https://github.com/swanderz/dbt-synapse/pull/6)
- Use CTAS to create seeds?

## Installation
Easiest install is to use pip (not yet registered on PyPI).

First install [ODBC Driver version 17](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=56567).

```bash
pip install dbt-synapse
```
On Ubuntu make sure you have the ODBC header files before installing

```
sudo apt install unixodbc-dev
```

## Authentication
the following is needed for every target definition for both SQL Server and Azure SQL.  The sections below details how to connect to SQL Server and Azure SQL specifically.
```
type: sqlserver
driver: 'ODBC Driver 17 for SQL Server' (The ODBC Driver installed on your system)
server: server-host-name or ip
port: 1433
schema: schemaname
```
### standard SQL Server authentication
SQL Server credentials are supported for on-prem as well as cloud, and it is the default authentication method for `dbt-sqlsever`
```
user: username
password: password
```
### Azure SQL-specific auth
The following [`pyodbc`-supported ActiveDirectory methods](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/using-azure-active-directory?view=sql-server-ver15#new-andor-modified-dsn-and-connection-string-keywords) are available to authenticate to Azure SQL:
- ActiveDirectory Password
- ActiveDirectory Interactive
- ActiveDirectory Integrated
- Service Principal (a.k.a. AAD Application)
- ~~ActiveDirectory MSI~~ (not implemented)

#### ActiveDirectory Password 
Definitely not ideal, but available
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryPassword
user: bill.gates@microsoft.com
password: i<3opensource?
```
#### ActiveDirectory Interactive (*Windows only*)
brings up the Azure AD prompt so you can MFA if need be.
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryInteractive
user: bill.gates@microsoft.com
```
#### ActiveDirectory Integrated (*Windows only*)
uses your machine's credentials (might be disabled by your AAD admins)
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
```
##### Service Principal
`client_*` and `app_*` can be used interchangeably
```
tenant_id: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
client_id: clientid
client_secret: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
```

## Table Materializations
CTAS allows you to materialize tables with indices and distributions at creation time, which obviates the need for post-hooks to set indices.

### Example
You can also configure `index` and `dist` in `dbt_project.yml`.
#### `models/stage/absence.sql
```
{{
    config(
        index='HEAP',
        dist='ROUND_ROBIN'
        )
}}

select *
from ...
```

is turned into the relative form (minus `__dbt`'s `_backup` and `_tmp` tables)

```SQL
  CREATE TABLE ajs_stg.absence_hours
    WITH(
      DISTRIBUTION = ROUND_ROBIN,
      HEAP
      )
    AS (SELECT * FROM ajs_stg.absence_hours__dbt_tmp_temp_view)
```
#### Indices
- `CLUSTERED COLUMNSTORE INDEX` (default)
- `HEAP`
- `CLUSTERED INDEX ({COLUMN})`
  
#### Distributions
- `ROUND_ROBIN` (default)
- `HASH({COLUMN})`
- `REPLICATE`

## example `YAML` for defining external tables
```YAML
sources:
  - name: raw
    schema: source
    loader: ADLSblob
    tables:
      - name: absence_hours
        description: |
          from raw DW.
        external:
          data_source: SynapseContainer
          location: /absence_hours_live/
          file_format: CommaDelimited
          reject_type: VALUE
          reject_value: 0
        columns:
```
## Changelog

### v0.18.0rc2

#### Fixes:
- added snapshot functionality

### v0.18.0rc1

#### Fixes:
- initial release

Commit message:

Enable & pass dbt-adapter-tests (#16)
* needed for integration testing

* drop_relation never worked?

* align arguments with dbt-core

* TSQL does not support DROP SCHEMA ... cascade

* align arguments with dbt-core

* USE is not supported on Synapse

* align args with dbt-core

* limit is not supported in T-SQL

* typo

* add custom test methods from Base Adapter

* document T-SQL support discrepancies

* required for customized test methods

* typo

* `+` is T-SQL's string concatenation operator

* 3.6 support now in master

* accurate testing information

* ephemeral and incremental tests are working??

* dropping conda in support of Docker and pip

* changelog

README.md, after:

# dbt-synapse

custom [dbt](https://www.getdbt.com) adapter for [Azure Synapse](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/synapse-analytics/). Major credit due to @mikaelene and [his `sqlserver` custom adapter](https://github.com/mikaelene/dbt-sqlserver).
Passing all tests in [dbt-integration-tests](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-integration-tests/). 

## major differences b/w `dbt-synapse` and `dbt-sqlserver`
- macros use only Azure Synapse `T-SQL`. [Relevant GitHub issue](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/azure-docs/issues/55713)
- use of [Create Table as Select (CTAS)](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/t-sql/statements/create-table-as-select-azure-sql-data-warehouse?view=aps-pdw-2016-au7) means you don't need post-hooks to create indices
- Azure Active Directory Authentication options
- rewrite of snapshots because Synapse doesn't support `MERGE`.
- external table creation via details from yaml.
  - must first create  `EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE` and `EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT`s.

## status & support
as of now, only support for dbt `0.18.0`

Passing all tests in [dbt-adapter-tests](https://github.com/fishtown-analytics/dbt-adapter-tests), except `test_dbt_ephemeral_data_tests`

### outstanding work:
-  `ephemeral` materializations (workaround for non-recursive CTEs)
- auto-create  `EXTERNAL DATA SOURCE` and `EXTERNAL FILE FORMAT`s.
- [officially rename the adapter from `sqlserver` to `synapse`](https://github.com/swanderz/dbt-synapse/pull/6)
- Use CTAS to create seeds?
- Add support for `ActiveDirectoryMsi`

## Installation
Easiest install is to use pip (not yet registered on PyPI).

First install [ODBC Driver version 17](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=56567).

```bash
pip install dbt-synapse
```
On Ubuntu make sure you have the ODBC header files before installing

```
sudo apt install unixodbc-dev
```

## Authentication
the following is needed for every target definition for both SQL Server and Azure SQL.  The sections below details how to connect to SQL Server and Azure SQL specifically.
```
type: sqlserver
driver: 'ODBC Driver 17 for SQL Server' (The ODBC Driver installed on your system)
server: server-host-name or ip
port: 1433
schema: schemaname
```
### standard SQL Server authentication
SQL Server credentials are supported for on-prem as well as cloud, and it is the default authentication method for `dbt-sqlsever`
```
user: username
password: password
```
### Azure SQL-specific auth
The following [`pyodbc`-supported ActiveDirectory methods](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/connect/odbc/using-azure-active-directory?view=sql-server-ver15#new-andor-modified-dsn-and-connection-string-keywords) are available to authenticate to Azure SQL:
- ActiveDirectory Password
- ActiveDirectory Interactive
- ActiveDirectory Integrated
- Service Principal (a.k.a. AAD Application)
- ~~ActiveDirectory MSI~~ (not implemented)

#### ActiveDirectory Password 
Definitely not ideal, but available
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryPassword
user: bill.gates@microsoft.com
password: i<3opensource?
```
#### ActiveDirectory Interactive (*Windows only*)
brings up the Azure AD prompt so you can MFA if need be.
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryInteractive
user: bill.gates@microsoft.com
```
#### ActiveDirectory Integrated (*Windows only*)
uses your machine's credentials (might be disabled by your AAD admins)
```
authentication: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
```
##### Service Principal
`client_*` and `app_*` can be used interchangeably
```
tenant_id: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
client_id: clientid
client_secret: ActiveDirectoryIntegrated
```

## Table Materializations
CTAS allows you to materialize tables with indices and distributions at creation time, which obviates the need for post-hooks to set indices.

### Example
You can also configure `index` and `dist` in `dbt_project.yml`.
#### `models/stage/absence.sql
```
{{
    config(
        index='HEAP',
        dist='ROUND_ROBIN'
        )
}}

select *
from ...
```

is turned into the relative form (minus `__dbt`'s `_backup` and `_tmp` tables)

```SQL
  CREATE TABLE ajs_stg.absence_hours
    WITH(
      DISTRIBUTION = ROUND_ROBIN,
      HEAP
      )
    AS (SELECT * FROM ajs_stg.absence_hours__dbt_tmp_temp_view)
```
#### Indices
- `CLUSTERED COLUMNSTORE INDEX` (default)
- `HEAP`
- `CLUSTERED INDEX ({COLUMN})`
  
#### Distributions
- `ROUND_ROBIN` (default)
- `HASH({COLUMN})`
- `REPLICATE`

## example `YAML` for defining external tables
```YAML
sources:
  - name: raw
    schema: source
    loader: ADLSblob
    tables:
      - name: absence_hours
        description: |
          from raw DW.
        external:
          data_source: SynapseContainer
          location: /absence_hours_live/
          file_format: CommaDelimited
          reject_type: VALUE
          reject_value: 0
        columns:
```
## Changelog

### v0.18.0.1
- pull AD auth directly from `dbt-sqlserver` (https://github.com/swanderz/dbt-synapse/pull/13)
- hotfix for broken `create_view()` macro (https://github.com/swanderz/dbt-synapse/pull/14)
- get `dbt-adapter-tests` up and running (https://github.com/swanderz/dbt-synapse/pull/16)
  - make `sqlserver__drop_schema()` also drop all tables and views associated with schema
  - introduce `sqlserver__get_columns_in_query()` for use with testing
  - align macro args with `dbt-base`

### v0.18.0rc2

#### Fixes:
- added snapshot functionality

### v0.18.0rc1

#### Fixes:
- initial release
